Peter Teal's recent interview with the
New York Times provides us with a good
contemporary example of inverted
spirituality. You I think you you would
prefer the human race to endure, right?
Uh uh you're hesitating. Well, I don't
know. I I would I would um
longit questions. Should the human race
survive?
Uh yes. But but and it's particularly
interesting for its insight into one of
the key figures pushing technocracy's
attempt to wear a Christian usually
Catholic skin suit. We're living through
a period of popular disillusion and
frustration which manifests as the
search for roots identity religion solid
principles very often. So, it makes
sense that some members of the elite,
consciously or not, would be looking for
a tradionary
energy for themselves. And again, they
may genuinely feel attracted to it.
That's nothing new, but we're seeing it
with Vans, whose career Teal sponsored,
or Larry Ellison. Citizens will be on
their best behavior because we're
constantly recording and reporting
everything that's going on. Funding Tony
Blair's faith foundation. Blair himself
is a champion of digital ID and liberal
pseudo Catholicism. So there's a
definite convergence between being close
to Catholic or being fake Catholic and
big tech in politics. Anyway, let's dig
into teal. Yeah, transhumanism is this,
you know, the ideal was this radical
transformation where your human natural
body gets transformed into an immortal
body. And um there's a critique of let's
say the trans people in a sexual context
or I don't know transvestite is someone
who changes their clothes and
crossdresses and a transsexual is
someone where you change your I penis
into a vagina and we can then debate how
well those surgeries work but uh we want
more transformation than that. It's uh
we want more transformation than that.
The critique is not that it's weird and
unnatural. It's man it's so pathetically
little and okay we want more than
crossdressing or changing your sex
organs. We want you to be able to change
your heart and change your mind and
change your whole your whole body. And
then Orthodox Christianity, by the way,
the critique Orthodox Christianity has
of this is these things don't go far
enough. On one level, this is a pretty
common Gen X and Boomer talking point.
You've never met a conservative like me.
I oppose currenty year thing, but
because it doesn't go far enough, I'm
more radical than you. It's a kind of
self-defeating rhetoric. Anyway, Teal's
thinking throughout the interview is
pretty sloppy, but the idea here seems
to be that since God transcends nature
in the human form, we should transgress
it. Transcendence is expressed in
transgression. God is imagined not as
the essence of reality as in genuinely
traditional metaphysics, but as outside
reality. And so to approach God is to
break reality down. No distinctions. the
mind's ephemeral desires and appetites
should be free to forever shape the
world, the body, rewrite the genetic
code, so on. There's something of a
world denying nasticism here, escape
from the world. It reminds me of how
Elon Musk has recommended Ian Banks's
books, which are sci-fi novels in which
this kind of future civilization, the
culture, can in fact radically transform
human beings in all kinds of ways.
People turn themselves into other
species and all sorts of crazy stuff.
The most accurate portrayal of a future
uh with um super intelligent AI is um
was done by Ian Banks. uh like the
culture books of yin bangs um are um are
the best that's probably the best
envisioning of a future for teal it's
interesting that he wants to vibe off
Catholic thought he gets some of his
ideas from Renee Gerard for example
about whom I've made a video and
actually criticizes Calvinism God is not
behind history God is not causing
everything God is behind Jesus Christ
entering history because God was not
going to leave us so at some point at
some point at some point God is going to
step And I am not I'm not I am not that
Calvinist. And uh it's not Calvinism.
Calvinism is actually closer to teal
than Catholic thought in that it does
tend to conceptualize God as a kind of
pure potency, absolute sovereignty,
which does not coincide with his other
attributes of mercy and justice and
such. You end up with a God that's just
power in any direction. Not really
distinct from a merely accidental big
bang. say if you take that to its final
consequences. If you say God is free and
is free to act unjustly, you're
basically saying God is free to create a
square circle. Sure. But then by
definition, that circle is not a circle.
It's a square. And that's the kind of
God that Teal is positing. Existing
biological and moral structures don't
really stem from divine attributes. We
are called not to preserve and enhance
natural order, but break it down. He's
more a heretical Calvinist than a
heretical Catholic. Staying on the issue
of theology, this interview is
interesting because it comes on the
heels of another interview, Cruz, Ted
Cruz with Tucker Carlson. And if Teal
divorces Christianity from morality and
spirituality through big brain esoteric
philosophizing, Cruz does the same
through a kind of surface level very
superficial reading. And Cruz admitted
that being a Christian politician for
him isn't about pragmatic strategic
leadership or moral principles. It's
mainly about commitment to a specific
state. as low information an approach to
history and scripture as you can have
really because biblically we're
commanded to support Israel. But number
two, hold on no hold on you're a senator
and now you're throwing out theology and
I'm a Christian. I am allowed to weigh
in on this. We are commanded as
Christians to support the government of
Israel. Cruz and Teal have equal but
opposite anti-Christianities.
So back to Teal. Morality would end up
being about our power and presumably our
desire to alter the structure of nature.
He's almost taking the Nietian criticism
of Christianity and asserting it as his
religion. It's kind of anti-life.
Degeneracy for teal isn't moral
degeneracy. It's technical and economic
stagnation. Restraining innovation is
evil. FDA regulations and some eventual
one world government trying to stop us
from advancing is the antichrist. That
the entire world has submitted for 50
years to peace and safety. This is a 1
Thessalonians 5:3. The slogan of the
antichrist is peace and safety. And and
we've submitted to um you know the FDA
regulates not just drugs in the US but
deacto in the whole world because the
rest of the world defers the FDA. The
nuclear regulatory commission
effectively regulates nuclear power
plants all over the world. People you
can't you know you can't design a
modular nuclear reactor and just build
it in Argentina. They they won't trust
the Argentinian regulators. They're
going to defer to to the US. And so it
is at least it's at least a question
about why we've had 50 years of
stagnation. Does it make sense to say
that evil is about restraining
innovation to some degree? We have to
cultivate our skills and knowledge.
Sure. But sometimes we also have to
prune to cut back. Advancement isn't
good as such. It's actually difficult to
make real hot takes because the
interviewer himself nails Teal's
inconsistencies a few times. Any one
world government would need Teal's own
Palunteer type surveillance predictive
big data crunching technology at the
very least in order to pull off the
difficult logistical task of integrating
the whole planet's administrations. And
the point of pursuing freedom in a very
naive way is that it ends up leading you
to worse, more oppressive structures.
Right? If you break society down and
suddenly you can't rely on your
neighbors, now you have to rely on top-
down systems of control for security.
And we've seen this many times in the
history of the West recently. And so
it's pretty logical that Teal ends up
supporting surveillance technology being
developed and all sorts of things that
are just objectively likely to lead to
oppression in the pursuit of abstract
naive freedom. It's part of that sloppy
thinking that also leads him to think
that godliness is about breaking with
the structure of things sort of natural
order. It's a kind of Gen X sci-fi
utopianism that ends up in false
dichotoies and desire to flee the
complexity of life. The same basic
contradiction shows up all over Teal's
thinking. And to be fair, he admits that
I am schizophrenic on this stuff. For
example, he contrasts politics to
technology as though his companies like
Palunteer, which he co-founded in 2003,
didn't get CIA funding. Karp, his
Palunteer co-founder in the
technological republic, actually credits
Teal for big picture thinking, the idea
that Silicon Valley tech companies need
to stop making consumer goods, toys
basically, and get back to changing the
world, which means working with
Washington to fight for Karp's vision of
modern global liberalism. And Teal makes
basically the same case himself. MAGA
was about trying to get society and the
state focused on technological
innovation to recover the
hyperoptimistic quasi spiritual vision
of previous decades when people were
going so far as to believe in literal
bodily immortality just around the
corner. Culturally what I imagine it
looks like is early modernity where
people yeah they had they thought we
would cure diseases they thought we
would have radical life extension
immortality was that was part of the
project of early modernity was Francis
Bacon Condor say you know it was you
know and maybe it was maybe it was
anti-Christian maybe it was downstream
of Christianity was competitive if if if
Christianity promised you a physical
resurrection you know science was not
going to succeed unless it promised you
the exact same thing and then but I I
don't know I remember 1999 2000 when I
was when we were running PayPal um one
of my co-founders Luke Nos like he was
into alor and cryionics and people
should freeze themselves And and we um
we had one day where we took the whole
company to a freezing party. You know, a
Tupperware party. People sell Tupperware
policies at a freezing party. Was it
just your heads? You could get a you
could get a full body or just just head
was cheaper. It was materialistic
scientific progress. Basically replacing
spirituality. The patriotism of MAGA is
for Teal a bit of a convenient disguise
to get government and society on his
wavelength. Same with his
libertarianism. MAGA libertarianism like
Christianity are ops to get people
excited, create some sense of direction,
utopianism, basically being parasitic on
older visions of the good, older
concepts of nationhood or freedom or
transcendence. You're sucking the energy
from people's desire for traditional
moral certainties to get funding to
merge Silicon Valley with Washington.
But again, to be fair, Teal is pretty
transparent about all this, which we can
appreciate, and it points to this wider
trend of using specifically Catholicism
as a kind of covering for technocracy,
which I'm seeing. But it also shows us
how sloppy the thinking of the people
funding a lot of this really ends up
being. The direction here is towards a
kind of Warhammer 40,000
neo-religious
techno dystopia, but without the cool
aesthetics. Okay, just a quick reaction
video. I thought it'd be interesting to
get into Teal's ideas as he expresses
them. Not a deep dive or anything. Uh,
there's ways to help the channel in the
description. You can join my substack,
Twitter, etc. Buy me a coffee and please
subscribe if you would like to. And
until next time,